[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Voices From The Inside Out--
Innerviews: A Different
Kind of Talk Television.
>> The Buddha basically
was a revolutionary.
And he revolutionized
the Indian society,
and Buddhism revolutionized
every society where it went.
But the reason why
people haven't noticed
was that it wasn't what we
would call a hot revolution,
like Lenin or something.
It was a cool revolution.
>> Robert Thurman is arguably
the most respected Buddhist
scholar in the West.
In 1998, no less a
personage than His Holiness
the Dalai Lama, Thurman's
friend and teacher,
helped to dedicate
Tibet House in New York.
Not only is Thurmond president
of that organization,
but he's also a prolific
author and the head
of the Department of Religion
at Columbia University.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> He's also an outspoken
advocate for the plight
of the Tibetans, whose homeland
was overrun by the Chinese
in 1959.
These Tibetan monks, ,
performing recently in Phoenix
were driven from their centuries
old monastery and-- along with
their leader, the Dalai Lama--
remain in exile.
Thurman says that
political activism,
perhaps an unexpected quality
among gentle Buddhists,
is a natural outgrowth
of what it really
means to be a Buddhist.
My illuminating conversation
with Robert began there.
>> Mr. Thurman, what a
pleasure to sit down with you.
>> Well, it's a great pleasure
to be with you, Chantal.
>> I thank you.
Because the Buddhist way--
to the best of my knowledge--
is a simple way, let's begin
with a simple question.
What is a Buddhist?
>> What is a Buddhist?
>> Yes.
>> Well, a Buddhist can be
pretty much whatever they want
to be, you could
say, in general.
Technically, you
would say a Buddhist
is a person who has taken
refuge in the Three Jewels--
of the Buddha,
who is the teacher
of the way to
enlightenment, the Dharma,
which is enlightenment
itself and the reality
that underlies it and the
reality that unfolds our lives,
and the Sangha is
the community that--
of those who are
seeking that same way.
So a Buddhist is one
who has taken refuge
with those Three Jewels.
They're jewels because they're
so valuable and rare in sort
of the ocean of life's
possibilities, you could say.
That's a Buddhist.
>> It is interesting to me
that, despite the huge variety
of religions we have in
America, and so of them so old
and so powerful, so strong, so
many millions of Americans are
attracted to
Buddhism these days?
Why do you suppose that is?
>> Well, I think because
Buddhism is basically a way
to freedom.
The reason you take refuge
in those Three Jewels
is that you want to find
freedom from suffering, freedom
from sort of being
caught automatically
in involuntary responses
and sort of bondage
to this and that drives and
reactions and things like that.
And people in America, we
sort of admire freedom.
It's a constitutional right of
ours to have it and seek it.
We don't really doesn't
know what it is,
but we vaguely feel that
if we have more of it
we'll be more happy.
And so since Buddhism is a
sort of technical, inner way
to freedom, it kind of fits
with our sense of the outer--
the outer world,
you know, our notion
of political freedom and
freedom of the individual,
this sort of thing.
Buddhism is very,
very suited for that.
It's a method of
how to achieve that.
And people are attracted to it.
Luckily, Chantal, most
of the Buddhist groups
are not active proselytizers
or missionaries.
And they don't seek to
just increase their numbers
by enrolling a lot of people
nominally in the Buddhist
orders.
And so we're not making a
big campaign or something
like that, which
I think would be--
would be-- it's the
wrong type of history
to go around and have
religious competition, I think.
>> You know, there seem to
be so many different kinds
of Buddhist groups.
Just in Los Angeles,
where I live,
there are so many
different Buddhist sects.
>> Absolutely.
Mm-hmm.
>> Does that concern you, or
does it concern His Holiness,
that the essence of Buddhism
will be lost when there are
so many different kinds?
>> No, I don't think so.
There have always been
many different kinds.
You know, the early
teaching of the Buddha,
the monastic teaching, divided
into 18 different orders,
based on minor things
like whether or not
you could have three ounces
of salt in your wallet
or not as a monk,
minor sort of thing,
whether, when a monk had a wet
dream, it was a sin or not--
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> And that's just human
nature, I think, Chantal.
It doesn't worry His Holiness.
Actually, His Holiness has
an attitude, the Dalai Lama,
and a formal policy,
which he states regularly,
that he would prefer
not to convert
many people to Buddhism.
And he hopes that Christians
will remain Christians, Jews,
Jews, humanists, humanists.
But if they can find anything of
value from Buddhist meditation,
Buddhist philosophy or
psychology, Buddhist ethics,
by all means, make
use of it, but stay
within their own sort of ritual
and denominational matrix
with their families
and their traditions
so as to avoid stress and
conflict in their lives.
Only the very few
who, at some point,
decide they want to really
meditate in an advanced way
or do something
like that, he thinks
then, if they wish,
then, of course,
they should be free
in a free country.
But he doesn't encourage people
to shift denomination and as
if that would solve
their problems.
>> Speaking of meditation
in the Buddhist way,
I have a wonderful friend who is
a devout Buddhist, Jamie Otis.
On Sundays, he is silent.
>> Mm-hmm, that's right.
>> In fact, I think he's
writing a book called--
let's give Jamie a plug.
He's writing a book called
"Silent Sundays, One Man's
Journey."
>> Oh, really?
I didn't actually realize
that he was actually
writing it as a book.
But I knew they have it.
>> Well, there's talk of it.
>> Yes.
>> And his habit is to
be completely silent.
>> That's true.
He is.
He really does it too.
He writes you notes if you
try to say something to him.
>> And you know, because
I'm around Jamie,
I try it every now and then.
And it's hard.
>> Yes.
It is.
>> It's very hard.
>> It's good, though.
It makes you think about things.
He communicates with his
gestures, his expressions,
right?
Well, you've noticed that.
>> Of course.
>> It's wonderful.
>> So my question to you is,
what does silence bring to us?
Because I know it is very
often the Buddhist way
to meditate in silence, to be
silent, as our friend Jamie is.
What gift--
Well, but sometimes we
do have type A Buddhists.
I am one of them.
>> Aha.
>> I am a noisy Buddhist.
So I don't reify
silence, although there
is a famous thing.
There is a sutra
that I translated
called "The Holy
Teaching of Vimalakirti."
And in that, in chapter 9,
there is a very famous point
where, after asking 32
different people what
their view of the nature
of ultimate reality was,
the highest reality
type of question--
>> Yes.
>> --they then turned
to Vimalakirti himself,
who was presiding,
and they say, well,
we've all said what
we wanted to say.
What do you think,
Vimalakirti, is
the highest nature of reality?
At which point, Vimalakirti
remained silent.
And they call that the lion's
roar of the Vimalakirti
silence.
And in a way, they consider
it sort of the most profound.
It's sort of this--
But now, in the
same sutra, there's
a goddess who comes out of
the woodwork at one point, who
is a very enlightened goddess.
And she's teasing
the different monks.
And at one time, in teasing
this one head monk, who's
a very enlightened
head monk, she
asked him, well, how long
have you been enlightened,
by the way, type of thing.
Because he's asking
her some questions.
And she says, well, how long
have you been enlightened,
she says.
And then he doesn't
say anything.
So then she doesn't accept
that as something profound.
And she says, excuse me,
Venerable Shariputra,
I asked you a question.
It's your turn to respond.
Like, how come you're not
answering when I asked you,
how long have you
been enlightened?
You just indicated something
about enlightenment.
Well, how long have
you been enlightened?
So he says, well, I
didn't say anything
because I thought that,
really, you can't indicated
enlightenment with any words.
She said, oh, Venerable
Shariputra, do not say that.
Do not try to point to
enlightenment by silence,
she said.
The nature of words is neither
external, nor internal,
nor somewhere in between.
Similarly, enlightenment is
neither external, nor internal,
nor somewhere in between.
Therefore, the nature of
words is itself enlightenment.
Enlightenment itself
is the nature of words.
So the poor guy was like--
he was a little bit--
he was a little bit
upset by that in a way.
But he was illumined by it.
So in other words, we don't want
to romanticize-- in one case,
in one context, even
silence is in a context.
And in a context where silence
is a restraint and a refraining
from pontificating about
ultimate reality, which,
finally, life-- and not
only ultimate reality,
but all reality is
somehow beyond words,
it is something
marvelous and magical
that can be discovered,
never encapsulated
in a verbal formula,
not anything.
I mean, you can't be.
Chantal is not
captured in a name.
Neither is Bob.
Nothing can be.
So all of life is, in this way,
marvelous, and inconceivable,
and almost full of
surprises, in a way.
And enlightenment is the same.
And sometimes, silence
will open people
to how close it is
to them and make
them feel something exalted.
Sometimes silence can be
like a pompousness, you know?
Like, I'm not going to say--
I know, but you--
you can't know, so
I'm not going to say
anything, sort of a withholding
silence, an excluding silence.
>> Yes.
>> So there are these
different kinds of silence.
We always have to differentiate.
Buddhism loves to differentiate,
as well as to unite.
>> It does.
It does.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of the things
you say enlightenment
is the tolerance of
cognitive dissonance.
>> Right.
>> What is that?
>> What is the tolerance
of cognitive-- well,
it's just what it says.
In other words, we
normally, because
of the imbalanced, egocentric
nature of our daily awareness.
You know, like, I'm sort of
always focused on myself,
you know?
And like, what am I doing
and getting out of it?
Or where am I?
I'm nervously
worrying about that.
So life is kind of
a strain for me.
So therefore, I'm always hoping
I could boil something down
to either this or that, reduce
it to either this or that.
And then I'll feel
more comfortable,
like it's under mind control.
On the other hand, life is not
like this or that, actually.
Things are always complicated.
And sometimes, things don't
fit in your neat categories.
And so the tolerance
of cognitive dissonance
means that I don't
freak out when
something exceeds my ability to
feel I have it under control.
I allow for it to have
its ambiguous nature.
And I can cope with
that ambiguous nature.
And so then I am more--
I have a much more peaceful and
relaxed way of enlightenment,
of dealing with things.
But I can only do
that if I'm not
being totally egocentrically
wound up, tight, you see.
So that is really what it means.
But it's specifically-- like
in the case of Buddhahood,
like a really total
enlightenment,
we tend to think,
because of the fatiguing
nature of our egocentric
consciousness,
that total enlightenment must
be something like a huge rest
or something like that.
If you actually, honestly ask
people, Buddhists-- not only
this or that kind of Buddhist
but any Buddhist, well, are you
enlightened or something?
They will say, well, no not yet.
And they're assuming that
the reason they're not
is because they're still there.
They're assuming
that one day, they're
going to be on a
retreat, or meditation,
or in some life or
another, they're
going to have a eureka
experience and boom,
they're going to disappear
from the universe.
Because they have a model
of enlightenment as if it
were a state of awareness
beyond deep sleep.
It is kind of a deeper oblivion
or something like that.
And that is totally false
and rejected by the Buddha.
You know, Buddha says wisdom
and compassion are indivisible,
wisdom and compassion.
What that means is
that the wisdom would
see through
everything in a sense
that it wouldn't hold on to
anything as a thing in itself
and be caught up by the
superficial, apparent solidity
of things and develop stability
to realize that all things are
empty space, or wide open,
or emptiness, or voidness,
or selflessness, all
this kind of statement
you can find about
wisdom, and basically,
that you have an experience
as if the whole of reality
were transparent, like a pane
of glass made of diamonds
or something like that.
You have that kind of
an experience, right?
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> But then why-- when it says
indivisible from compassion,
that state in itself is not
a state separated from all
the relational
things or yourself,
who is a relational being.
Because if that were so, it
wouldn't be an ultimate state.
It would be just something that
had closed off the relative,
you see.
It would be someplace you
would step out of the relative
into a sort of super relative.
You'd escape from
everything, in other words.
So when you look for the
state of enlightenment itself,
you find that enlightenment
also is empty.
That is to say, the transparent
is transparent of itself.
As soon as you know
that, suddenly,
you see all the
differentiated things again,
what they call a kind
of virtual reality,
or like in a dreamlike state.
Do you follow me?
>> Yes, I do.
>> So that's cognitive-- the
ultimate cognitive dissonance
is that a Buddha doesn't have
to remember, oh, yesterday,
I meditated and everything
dissolved into open space,
and today, I'm sitting
here with Chantal.
So well, I could go
back and be enlightened,
or I could just engage with the
world, but I go back and forth.
An enlightened
Buddha is right here,
totally present with
Chantal, or with Bob,
or with wherever we are.
And at the same time, this
is all total empty space,
completely, almost
as if nonexistent.
And therefore, that
being as free of being
attached to any one
part of it or invested
in this ego or that, or
this representation or that,
much freer in relating
to the individuated,
differentiated reality.
So my definition
of the tolerance
of cognitive dissonance has
to do with non-duality, what's
called the ultimate non-duality,
that you're totally in nirvana.
It's total space and freedom,
bliss-void indivisible,
and at the same time,
totally sensitive
to interrelating for
things and beings.
And especially, of course,
when you are like that,
you feel great because
you're an infinite space.
But the beings feel trapped
in their differentiated
individuality as if the
infinite was after them,
and their state of
struggle with the universe.
And so you don't
just say, oh, I'm
blissed out, you
should be blissed out,
forget you type of thing.
You actually feel their
state of trappedness.
And then you interact
with them in a way
as to optimally
in introduce them
to their own
possibility of freedom.
So that's wisdom and compassion.
That's cognitive dissonance.
>> Very well explained.
>> Sorry, a little,
maybe, lengthy.
>> No, not at all.
I mean, literally,
very well explained.
>> Oh, good.
Thank you.
>> I think what people struggle
with is maintaining that.
Because a lot of
people would say,
for example, it's easy for me
to maintain my Buddha nature
when I am in a meditation
center on a hill somewhere.
Very hard when I'm
on the San Diego
freeway at quarter of 6:00.
How do I maintain
that Buddha Nature?
>> Well, it's
difficult. And at first,
they say when we approach it,
there's a kind of oscillatory
experience.
So first thing people should
do is not worry about the fact
that there's an oscillation.
Because that's a natural
process of oscillation.
And you have to simply deepen
your awareness of selflessness,
vast space and
infinity type of thing,
and get less afraid of it,
and rest in it, and enjoy it.
And then when you come back
to the concrete, so to speak,
remember that it is like a
dream, that it's illusory.
It's not an illusion.
It's really real.
Other people are real.
You're real.
But don't get so
concretized about it.
And you can play with
it, more a relaxed way,
and by remembering
that it's all really
star stuff type of thing,
it's all really, like, empty,
and open, and free.
It's like virtual reality.
It's like if you really can--
So you doing it back and forth.
And then you get
really tied up in it,
and you become very emotional
or something like that,
then it gets really solid again.
And you feel really solid again.
Then you go back and oscillate,
and you go and calm down,
and see through it.
So for a while, that goes on.
But then the oscillation
gets narrower and narrower,
you know?
And then, sooner or
later, patiently--
See, one of the
illusions in America
is that enlightenment
is a eureka thing,
and it's going to be
boom, and oh, then I'll
be enlightened forever,
whereas actually, it's
a gradual process, you see.
Because what is unenlightenment?
Let's be simple.
It's not complicated.
Unenlightenment means that
you think you are totally real
and that you are the realest
thing in the universe.
And therefore, it's
natural that everything you
focus on yourself, and you
take everything for yourself.
And you try to do
everything for yourself.
And the universe
never agrees with you,
because it thinks it's more
important than you are.
And so you're always in
stress with the universe.
That's not enlightenment.
So enlightenment is
gradually reducing,
seeing through the exaggeration
of self-importance,
and self-aggrandizement,
and self-obsession,
and self-preoccupation.
But when you do
that, you naturally
become more aware of others.
You become more attuned
and fitting in with others.
You realize how you are
connected with them,
automatically, you see.
So it's a gradual thing.
It's like Atisha said,
the great Atisha,
the 10th, 11th century Indian
master who went to Tibet.
He said it's like butter
melting in a broth.
It's like ironing the wrinkles
out of a wrinkled cotton
cloth with a hot stone.
It's a gradual thing,
becoming enlightened.
Now, finally, of
course, I think it is--
the goal is to be like Keanu
in "The Matrix," you know?
>> Yes.
>> --when you are the one, when
you know it's just a computer
program in a way.
And yeah, of course, it's
very real to the people caught
in it, so you remain dedicated
to helping them find freedom.
But on the other hand, you know.
Therefore, that's when you
can stop the bullet, you know?
When that bullet is shooting
towards you, you just stop it.
Because you can master the
program as well as consent
to its reality insofar as you
can help others by doing so.
That's the goal, you see.
That's cognitive dissonance.
>> Got it.
Got it.
>> And we're so-- it's
just that-- and you know,
one thing people think
is they think, well,
if enlightenment is
great compassion,
wouldn't that be awful, great
compassion meaning feeling
the suffering of others and
willing to help them free
themselves from it?
Wouldn't that be terrible?
Because I'm so caught
up in my own suffering,
imagine if I was aware of
everybody else's suffering,
I wasn't walled off from it.
Wouldn't that be terrible?
And yes, it would be terrible.
Enlightenment would be like hell
if your experience of others;
suffering after
enlightenment was
the old, concretized,
egocentric way we
experience our own suffering.
But luckily, by cultivating that
wisdom side, where everything
becomes transparent
as diamonds or glass,
your own suffering becomes
kind of unreal to you.
It's still real.
But it's not as real.
And you become more--
it's like a virtual
suffering, you see.
And so then you are aware of
everybody else's suffering.
But to you, it's kind of
like a virtual suffering.
And yet-- And that's where
the dissonance comes in.
To them, you realize
it's not virtual.
It's really real to them.
And it really pains
them therefore.
So then you can really
help them be free of it.
Otherwise, how would
compassion be effective?
If I feel your pain--
>> Yes.
>> --and I'm just as
dragged into it as you are,
then we'll just both enjoy the
pain and it won't help you.
But if I your pain, I feel it--
I can diagnose it kind
of, at the same time,
I can see your
potential joy, then
I can help you move, since
you have to do it yourself
ultimately--
I can help you turn
the different corners
you need to in
your understanding
to move from seeing your
pain as pain to come
into where you can find your
joy and empathy, something
like that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think it's very important
that you're a noisy Buddhist.
>> [LAUGHS] Well, that's lucky.
My wife wears ear
plugs sometimes.
>> I think it's important.
>> And my children do.
>> Because without you being
the noisy Buddhist you are--
>> Oh, that's kind of you.
>> --you could not be as active.
>> Uh-huh.
>> You could not be
as active politically.
Because I think there
is a misconception
that Buddhists have no political
view, that they are not--
>> That's true.
>> --active in the world,
when indeed they are.
>> Absolutely.
They always have been, too.
My book, "Inner
Revolution," really, I hope
shows and proves,
an as long as it
proves, that the Buddha
basically was a revolutionary.
>> Yes, indeed.
>> And he revolutionized
Indian society.
And Buddhism revolutionized
every society where it went.
But the reason why
people haven't noticed
and they thought Buddhism
was sort of marginal or not
involved was that it wasn't what
we would call a hot revolution,
like Lenin or something.
It was a cool revolution.
It was content to see
the revolution take place
over generations.
It was actually an
effective revolution.
It didn't bring about
huge backlashes,
you know, just sort
of change the players
and leave the oppressive
structure in place.
And in fact, it was a revolution
from within by people changing
that egocentric, dominating
personality from within that
then causes all the trouble
in politics, you know,
the clash of egos.
>> Would this be a bit of a
hot potato question in some
Buddhist circles?
Is there a movement
within Buddhism today--
some Buddhists, I should say--
that the stand on non-violence
is not necessarily
the way anymore because of
what's happening in Tibet?
>> No, not exactly.
There has been a
movement in Buddhism,
in Western Buddhism, called--
sort of related to--
called engaged Buddhism.
And it relates to the
wonderful organization called
the Buddhist Peace Fellowship.
And they went into war
protesting in the early days.
And then subsequently, they're
into activism in prisons,
and with wife battering,
and with addiction,
and you know, hospices
and what have you.
They're really doing great,
great things in collaboration
with Christian colleagues
and brothers and sisters,
and very much devoted to
non-violence, growing mostly
out of the Zen, and a little
bit to the Vietnamese,
actually, Thich Nhat Hanh
and the Sri Lankan or Burmese
traditions, the
vipassana traditions.
More recently, the
Tibetan movement
has interacted with
that to some degree.
And the Tibetan movement
brings in a sort
of philosophical thing
where surgical violence
does become a part of the
strategies of non-violence.
It isn't that non-violence
is not the strategy.
It remains the strategy.
His Holiness the Dalai Lama
has insisted consistently
non-violence is the strategy.
There was a guerrilla
movement by the Tibetans
in the '60s against the
Chinese, very likely
supported by the West.
But the Dalai Lama
never sanctioned it.
And he deplored it.
And he begged them not to do it.
And then he asked them to stop
when it was really hopeless.
And you know, they ignored him.
And he's always been
stuck on that, but not
only out of the
principled reason,
also because of the
pragmatic reason.
In other words,
the Chinese invaded
Tibet in the early '50s.
And they killed over a
million Tibetans since then.
And then there was
a little bit of--
and then the
Cultural Revolution,
they destroyed all
the monasteries
and all the
paintings, everything.
>> And still are.
>> And there was a brief
release in the '80s.
They let them kind
of rebuild a little.
They just let loose of them.
They didn't really
encourage them,
but they let loose
of them and were
shocked to see that the Tibetans
still rebuilt everything.
They, in their hearts,
had been unchanged
by thought reform
and class struggle
and Communist ideology.
But then, now, in the '90s,
they're crushing them again.
Because they're reverting
to a very regressive policy
now in a kind of attempt to
make a final solution to avoid
the fate of Russia,
which actually,
it will overtake them, whether
they try to avoid it or not.
But they're persisting
longer than Russia
because they're more
coddled by the West,
whereas Russia was
blocked by the West.
>> Yes, yes.
>> And so they now are trying
to crush and finish off
the Tibetans by
assimilating them,
by moving in millions of Chinese
and intermarrying and giving
the Chinese the economic
advantage and so forth.
So hopefully, they will marry
Tibetan women and things
like that.
And then they will
have assimilated
the Tibetan population, which
is another form of genocide.
It's called genocide
by population transfer
in the human rights lingo.
But still, still-- so they've
done all these awful things,
though, is what I'm saying.
And therefore, for example,
a Dalai Lama in 1950,
if he had had the capacity,
he would have found it--
and there is Buddhist precedent
for this in the Mahayana
sutras.
He could have defended
his country with violence,
in other words, manned
the frontier if they
could have kept them out.
And then that would
have saved the Chinese
from committing all
these atrocities.
So although there
would have been
some violence in a
struggle on the frontier,
that would have prevented
a lot more violence.
So in the more
sophisticated bodhisattva
theory, Mahayana theory,
surgical violence
is not unrealistic.
It is not impossible.
It's part of non-violence,
just like if you, Chantal, are
bitten by a poisonous
snake today,
non-violence would say,
oh, I can't take a knife
and cut a hole in your leg.
That's violent.
But clearly, if a poison snake
bit you, we would take a knife,
cut a hole, and suck the
poison out, and thereby
save your life.
So that's surgical
violence, you see.
>> I see.
>> But the Dalai Lama doesn't
believe in it in the case
of Tibet because
it's impractical.
There's no way he could
have won a defense war.
There's no way he could do a
lightning strike and eliminate,
like, say, a million Chinese.
You know, it has to be
done through dialogue.
It has to be done by
appealing to the hearts
of the Chinese people
in the long run.
But there are some
Tibetans, younger ones,
ones who are annoyed by
Buddhism kind of-- they
are annoyed by the restraint
of Buddhist non-violence--
who are saying, we
should do violence.
They only hope that the
Kosovars, because they fought,
they only helped whoever
they've helped, you know,
because they fought back.
And they think, we don't care,
because we don't fight back.
So we must-- we
should do violence.
And so far, the Xiangya
Lama has managed
to restrain those hotter heads.
But it's nip and tuck.
It's getting nip and tuck
because it's going on so long.
>> I think a lot of Americans
are quite misinformed about
what's happening in Tibet.
>> Oh, that's totally true.
>> And it occurs to me
that one of the reasons
they're misinformed is they say,
what does it have to do with
me?
I live in Boston.
>> Right.
>> What does it
have to do with me.
I live in Washington.
>> Right.
>> So--
>> "Ask not for whom
the bell tolls," right?
"It tolls for thee."
>> It does.
>> Right?
Freedom-- we love freedom.
We think our American
dream is based on freedom.
We cannot have freedom when
anyone doesn't have freedom.
That's the amazing, strange,
paradoxical, and unfortunate
imperative that the
American people live with.
For example, we've never
really realized our freedom
here because the signers of
our Declaration of Independence
were slave owners.
And also, their women
didn't vote at that time.
And that was not real freedom.
It was freedom amongst a
certain collegiality, but not
real freedom.
Then we went through
the Civil War.
We went through the
feminist movement,
you know, the universal
suffrage, et cetera, et cetera.
But still, now, we are
imprisoning up to 2 million
of our members of other races.
We have privatized
the prison industry.
We're sending them up.
We don't build any schools
in the inner cities.
We are as bad or worse than
South Africa and Apartheid,
in fact, now.
And therefore, we feel paranoid.
We don't feel free, even still.
Even we talk about
freedom and the new age,
whatever, but we actually
are living in a society
where the injustices committed
to the first Americans,
the Native Americans, the
broken treaties, the injustices
committed to the
black Americans,
the slavery, and now
the ghettoization
and the imprisonment,
is still going on.
And we will not be free.
And Tibet, although it's the
other side of the planet,
ironically, is also a jail
of our own supporting.
>> Yes.
>> The Russians, in the
early '90s, did what
the realpolitikers in our
country said would never happen
and based our whole
military-industrial complex
on the fact that it
would never happen.
The Russians gave
up without a fight.
They left all of Eastern Europe.
They said, forget it.
This life of armament
is not worth it.
We want to have some Mickey
Mouse, some TV, some pleasure,
a decent icebox.
Forget about it.
America is not the deadly enemy.
We're not going to
live like this anymore.
That's what we-- then let's join
the free world type of thing.
That's what we had been
hoping for actually, OK?
What do we do?
Very little help
to them actually.
The Chinese refused to do that.
They killed their students
in Tiananmen Square and all
over China, not just in Beijing.
They killed anybody
who spoke for freedom.
And then what do we do?
We invested hundreds of billions
of dollars in them since then.
Because our elite is
afraid of freedom.
We are afraid of our American
dream, our own leadership.
So Tibet is so
crucial because Tibet
shows if we can liberate
Tibet, we liberate the Chinese
from that oligarchy that is
supporting the Chinese, which
our industry, military
industrial complex,
is supporting, and then we free
ourselves from the same people.
>> Indeed.
>> We get rid of them.
We convert those prisons back
to schools for the ghettos.
We convert them back to--
we educate the people
as youths rather than
let them grow up
ignorant and alienated
and then lure them into,
obviously, committing crime
and then arrest them, which is
what we're doing with them now,
you know.
>> So it is such a ripple
effect, what happens in--
>> It's a total ripple effect.
That's why our peacemaking
power of non-violence conference
in San Francisco the Tibet House
did was so powerful, because--
>> Indeed it was.
>> --there was a moment where
all the losers on the planet
had a moment of
shared connection,
the losers in the American
inner cities with the losers
in international world of
the so-called non-existent
Tibetans, who are being
genocided because the world has
decided they don't exist.
The UN won't consider
that they exist
for fear of offending China.
>> Yeah.
>> And those losers suddenly
embraced each other.
The meek inherited the
Earth, as Jesus said.
But of course, it was temporary.
And it was only a
foretaste of what
will happen whenever the
inner revolution emerges
into the open and people are
confident enough about it
and determined enough about
it to really take action.
18% of college age students
vote in this country, only 18%.
>> Tragic.
>> 38% of the total
electorate, maximum, votes.
So naturally, we
are a country that's
run by an oligarchy
that does not
have the interests of 100%
of the people at its heart.
>> You do know that your passion
for this is extraordinarily
enrolling.
>> Oh, good.
>> There are people watching--
well, noisy Buddhist,
it's important.
That's why I say
you're important.
People watching this broadcast
will say, OK, what do I do?
How can one person begin
to make a difference?
Because I believe one person
can make a difference.
>> You're absolutely--
I believe so too.
And of course, the first
thing that person can do
is recognize and
take responsibility
that they make a difference.
>> Yes.
>> I have noticed in talking in
America that the more powerful
a person is, the less they
think they make a difference.
The more strongly
they argue the fact
that I don't make a
difference, nothing I could do
would help, the more
ability they have to help.
The people in the
ghetto, the people
we met at the
conference, the people
I meet in the streets
in New York who
have to deal with
immediate emergency
situation, a child
in prison, have
to go upstate to meet that
child and keep some hope
alive, et cetera, they do
not think that what they do
doesn't matter.
They can't afford to think that.
They actually are much
more hopeful, as oppressed
as they are, than the people
who have actual power, who
could support candidates, who
can change their lifestyle, who
can give money to help
this and that thing,
who can create something,
and who have real power.
They're the ones,
ironically, who say,
I have nothing I could
do, to excuse themselves
from the responsibility
of doing something.
>> Yes, yes, yes.
>> And America, for
example, as a whole,
is more than any country,
shown by the voting rate,
that has decided its middle
classes, we can't do anything.
And America sits.
And I think, by
not doing anything,
what you do in America is you
totally add to the problem.
>> Of course.
>> You're consuming the
energy of the world.
You're polluting the world.
Your investments
abroad are supporting
the tyrants, and the torturers,
and the non-unionizing work
factories, slave owned
drivers and so forth.
You're supporting all of that
when you don't do anything.
And yet, America has the--
America has the power.
If America could force
its State Department
to make human rights part
of its commerce department,
that would make
a vast difference
in many parts of the
country, of the world.
And so the first
thing we do, simply,
is take responsibility that
what we do absolutely matters.
And the second thing
everyone would do
is register to vote and vote.
My wife is Swedish.
And she never tires of
telling me that in Sweden,
in any election, 98.5%
of the population
votes that is eligible to vote.
And therefore, they
have a government that
cares about most of the people.
They don't always
do everything right.
They're not perfect.
They have a difference-- it's
a country with different kinds
of problems.
But they don't have a government
that radically does not
reflect the will of the majority
of its people, as ours does,
although we want our democracy.
But it is not a
democracy when 38% vote.
Then 20% of the people
can dominate the 100%.
>> Yes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The other group of
people, it just occurs
to me as I listen to you
today, who have a great
say, obviously, in
what happens in Tibet
and the future of Tibet are
the Tibetan leaders themselves.
How are they chosen?
>> The Tibetan leaders?
>> Yes.
I mean, here we're elected.
How are the Tibetan--
>> They-- well,
nowadays, in exile,
they're chosen by election.
And they have their
own electoral process
because they have developed
a working constitution,
and a parliament,
and a supreme court,
modeled on a combination
of the Indian,
the British, and the
American systems,
which they hope to
implement in Tibet
if they ever get true
self-rule in Tibet.
In Tibet, of course,
they're just--
the ones who work--
mainly, Chinese
run all the offices
at all the higher levels.
But they have
Tibetan collaborators
who are appointed to the lower
levels of their bureaucracy.
So they don't have
any freedom in Tibet.
And you know, Communism
has no real elections.
The party controls everything.
>> Right.
>> But in ancient time
in Tibet, of course,
they had a funny
way of leadership,
where you had to have many
lifetimes of on-the-job
training.
In other words, you
didn't run for election.
You just had to prove that,
well, I've already been
sheriff for five lifetimes.
>> That's right.
[LAUGHS]
>> I practiced, and now
I'll be a good sheriff.
And then people say, OK,
he's the reincarnation
of the sheriff.
Let's let him go
back to the sheriff.
So ironically,
although they didn't
have an electoral system,
they had one step, certainly,
more towards the democratic than
the dynastic, imperial system,
where you just-- your
children inherited
the throne type of thing.
Because those reincarnated
lamas, like the Dalai Lamas,
all but one of them were born in
lower class, peasant families.
Only one was born as an
aristocratic and noble family,
out of 14.
The rest were all--
and they were born in
different regions of Tibet.
So it was just like log cabin
to White House, Hope, Arkansas
to White House.
It operated in a way
of effectively giving
a kind of turnover and social
mobility within the system,
but without, of course, the
modern electoral process.
Because they didn't
have universal literacy.
And they didn't
have voting boxes,
electronic communication,
this kind of thing.
But they hope to have
that in the future.
And they hope to have democracy.
Although I'm a
little bit concerned
that there's a complexity
there because one
of our aspects of
democracy is secularism,
of American democracy, you know,
separation of church and state.
But we have interpreted that--
that was meant to protect
different religious movements,
minority religious movements,
from being persecuted
by some majority religion
that would dominate
the state because of our
ancestors' experience
of persecution in Europe.
But that was not
necessarily meant
to keep all spiritual
perspectives out
of the educational system and
out of the governmental system
and sort of have a ethic of
money, an ethic of materialism.
But that's what it's
resulted in, you see.
So there must be a middle
way between secularism
that just leads to
materialism and some sort
of religious dominance that is
one particular religion, where
you have a spiritual infusion
in the ethic of the state
and the ethic of the people.
You preserve that.
And yet, you don't
allow any one religion--
you preserve pluralism
on the other hand,
and don't allow one religion
to persecute any other.
And I hope that
Tibet will rethink
its imitation of
Western democracy
and come up with
more of a middle way.
Do you know I mean?
Without having an inquisition.
But although, because Buddhism
is a less dogmatic religion
than monotheistic religions,
not just Western ones, but even
Indian or eastern
monotheistic religions,
because it-- but they don't
believe in any superboss deity.
They believe in the
deities of love.
And there's a few naughty ones.
But they don't believe
in one big boss.
So therefore, they tend
to be less sort of--
they never had an
Inquisition, where
they pulled out your
thumbs until you
proclaimed this or that dogma.
They didn't do that in Buddhism.
>> Are you optimistic
about the future of Tibet?
>> I am.
I don't know how.
[LAUGHS] It's such a dire
situation at the moment.
But in fact, I am.
And not only for mystical
reasons, let's say,
because I'm fairly weak.
I mean, I mentally would
like to be more like that,
but I'm not that strong in
that area, by being too left
brain and rationalistic, the
way I was educated, but really,
from my view of this
socioeconomic, technological
state of the planet.
In other words,
the British didn't
give up their empire,
or the French Algeria,
the British India, the
Portuguese, the Congo,
whatever-- they didn't give
these up because they were
all a bunch of bodhisattvas.
The Russians didn't give up
all of their possessions,
their empire, you
know, the Soviet Union,
because they were suddenly
sainted or enlightened.
They did it because the
military industrial control
of huge territory is
not cost effective
in the modern economy.
Look at the case of China.
The Chinese who tried to control
a big territory and maintain
an imperium in Mongolia,
Manchuria, Xiangyang,
and Tibet, since their
liberation in 1950, 1949,
the so-called liberation--
they are still
totally poor, really,
except for all this
foreign investment
lately, due to the fantasies of
Western, naive business people.
But Hong Kong,
with no territory,
Taiwan, with a little island,
Singapore Chinese community,
Indonesian Chinese community,
Malaysian Chinese community,
the US overseas
Chinese community,
have prospered mightily
with no territory,
just by industrial creativity,
consumer savvy, marketing
brilliance, inventions, genius.
That's the way the
world economy is.
The idea that you pay some
troops, millions of them,
some salary to go and
suppress people's creativity
so you can say I own the land
is stupid in the modern economy.
It leads, eventually,
to-- in the case of Tibet,
because of the religiosity and
non-violence of the Tibetans,
they haven't been
blowing up the bridges
all the time, like in
Afghanistan or somewhere,
or in Vietnam, because of
the particular intensity
of the non-violence of
the Tibetan ideology.
But eventually, they
will if this goes on.
The Dalai Lama will not
be able to restrain them.
And the point is they haven't
done anything creative.
They haven't been allowed to.
Whereas Tibetans in exile
have thrived and prospered
with their creativity.
And Tibet could be
a gem economically
if China wasn't suppressing it.
It could be a fabulous tourist
destination, a fantastic health
industry.
The Tibetans would make their
place as beautiful and as
adorable and as cute as
when they come and give
a teaching here or
make a mandala there
or do chants in
the other places,
or have shops out in the street.
They're incredibly
creative people.
They're the Swiss
people of Asia.
And so, the modern
economy, it is creative.
I have a friend who
is a Chinologist who
had his eyes open finally
learning about the "minority"
quote-unquote
situation in China,
the Tibetans and everybody.
And he had a great thing when
his PRC people would say, oh,
it takes us so long to develop.
We're so big.
Be patient with us.
We are third world.
We're so big.
And he would say, guys,
take a look at Hong Kong.
If bigness is a
problem, get small.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> So for that reason,
I'm really optimistic.
>> Excellent.
>> The military, and the PLA
and these people in China,
People's Liberation Army,
they're making money ripping
off the trees in
Tibet, some minerals.
And they have salaries
for their soldiers.
And it's a big
campaign for them.
It's a basic minus.
It's a deficit at this stage
in the national exchequer
if somebody--
[INAUDIBLE] or Jiang Zemin,
as economists from the coast,
from Shanghai,
make a calculation,
they are losing money on
Tibet, although individual PLA
businesses are making money.
But the overall
Chinese people are
losing money for this adventure
of theirs in the Himalayas.
>> Right.
>> So that's why I'm optimistic.
Because it's just not cost
effective to be nasty.
It's too expensive.
>> It's not.
>> Besides being not
nice, it's too expensive.
>> When people read
your most recent book,
called "Circling the
Sacred Mountain"--
>> Yes.
>> --what would you want them
to know, to come away with?
>> What I would want
them to come away with,
besides a pleasant walk in
the mountains in this magic
mountain, sacred not only
to Buddhists, but to Hindus,
to Jains, to Bonpos--
and I met a couple of
Japanese Christian monks
who were circumnambulating
when I was there.
I think it's one of the
holiest mountains in the world.
There's something
magical about it.
>> Isn't it said that when
you circle that mountain,
your sins are eradicated.
>> That's right.
>> That's one of the--
>> Well, that's a general
pilgrimage thing, know,
lure in the same kind of thing.
It's an Asian lure.
>> It's a lovely notion.
>> It is a lovely notion.
It's a rather harsh
mountain to get around
because the high pass going
around is 18,600 feet.
>> [GASPS]
>> So it's quite a hike.
But that's also kind of macho
and challenging and nice.
It's not dangerous.
You don't have to
climb with ropes.
But it's just a hard walk.
>> But it's hard to get--
>> For one who's not
used to the climate.
>> --air.
Yeah.
>> But I would like them
to enjoy the vista of this
wonderful-- and see the world
from this sort of sacred holy
place.
That I would like.
And the other thing I would
like them to come away
with about Buddhism is
that Buddhism is not just
some exotic, strange,
mysterious thing that is simply
meditation, or simply some
sort of beads, or simply
some sort of magical
mantra, something like that,
or some lama.
Buddhism, basically,
is the turning away
from self-obsession
and self-infatuation
and self-preoccupation, and
turning towards altruism,
and other sensitivity,
and lovingness
and compassionateness to
others, and finding happiness
through the happiness of others,
instead of being constantly
satisfied by focusing
on how happy you are,
which will never be good enough.
When you focus on
how happy you are,
even when you're
having fun, you're
going to be dissatisfied
because you'll
remember you had more
fun another time,
or it could be better this way
or something better that way.
So that is really
what Buddhism is.
You know, so many
people, I think,
think about it negatively.
They think it's just some
running away from the world.
And when they think
they're positive,
they think it's
some sort of escape
into some meditative state,
away from their problems.
But in fact, what Buddhism is
the same thing that humanism
wants, the same thing
that Christianity wants,
that Judaism wants,
that Islam wants,
Hinduism wants, which
is to help people
find more happiness by being
less selfish basically.
And I give a
teaching there which
I gave to the people
on the mountain, which
comes from ninth
century Tibet and Bengal
and so forth, some of the great
Indian masters of that time,
in a period when India
was under invasion
from various steppe, nomadic
people who were laying waste
to India.
So it was a very,
very dangerous time
for everybody, which is called
"The Blade Wheel of Mind
Reform."
>> The Blade Wheel--
>> "The Blade Wheel of
Mind-- the blade wheel is one
of the things that the
ninjas throw, you know?
It's a spinning knife with
the blades on all sides.
>> I see, yes.
>> Like a roto-rooter
or something.
And "The Blade Wheel of Mind
Reform" is like a very fierce--
it's a very fierce image
of using a wheel like that
to conquer the inner
enemy of selfishness
and to reform the mind from
being self-inverted and focused
on itself to opening into
the world and realizing
what a marvelous,
magical place it is.
So that's what I
would really like them
to come away with in that book.
And I think I was inspired
to do that because being
in that place of
that mountain, you
didn't feel like a beating
around the bush, you know,
because you're in this
amazing place in nature.
I swear I'm not that
good an environmentalist.
I'm not psychic or anything.
But it was like when I
woke up the first morning
in that place--
and the surface of it,
the little town near it
is terribly grubby,
Chinese garrison.
You know, the Tibetan pilgrims
are sort of suppressed and so.
On and it's broken glass.
I mean, you know, underfed
dogs, it's not that cute.
But somehow, the whole
land, and the earth,
and the mountain, the ice,
was all alive and glowing.
And I've never seen
nature like that.
And I was totally surprised.
I was like--
I was embarrassed when
I first got there.
I thought oh, what
a grubby place.
I brought all these people here.
It's just another dumb place
that some pilgrims thinks
is great, but it's
just a bunch of rocks.
I woke up in the
morning, and the rocks
were dancing and
singing and glowing.
And I couldn't believe it.
And then everybody who
was there the whole time--
And another property of Mt.
Kailash-- anybody
who goes there,
they should take pictures of
their ancestors, any departed
loved one, lock of hair.
Tibetans do that, these
different sort of-- they're
not really graveyards,
they're commemoration yards,
which look a little
bit like junk heaps.
But people put
articles of clothing.
Because when you
go there, you start
to think of all of your roots
and the past generations.
And the Tibetans
believe that if you
make prayers for even
people in the past,
the power of the deities
of that place is so great,
they can sort of go and help
people in the past even,
change even a negative past.
It's sort of a miraculous
thing, you know.
And it's very, very moving.
It really is a moving place.
So I hope everyone will enjoy
that when they read that book.
>> "Circling the Sacred
Mountain," I think they will.
I thank you for all your books.
>> Thank you.
>> I thank you for your
extraordinary words,
your compassion in the world.
And mostly, I thank you
for being a noisy Buddhist.
>> [LAUGHS] Thank you very much.
That's very nice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]